content/page/projects.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Projects
permalink: /projects/
aliases:
- /projects/
---

# [Multiplayer TicTacToe](https://tictactoe-elm.herokuapp.com/)

Written in Elm and using Phoenix Channels ❤️

- Written for a workshop at the [Elixir RheinMain Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/Elixir-Meetup-Rhein-Main)
- Got me started with Phoenix Channels and handling Websockets in Elm
- Source code available: [Elixir backend](https://github.com/jfornoff/tictactoe) & [Elm frontend](https://github.com/jfornoff/tictactoe-elm)

# [Game of Life](https://elm-game-of-life.herokuapp.com/)

Written in Elm ❤️

- Implements [Conway's Game of Life](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_Game_of_Life)
- Taught me quite a bit about encapsulation in Elm modules and how to represent the current Game state as Elm types
- Source code available on [Github](https://github.com/jfornoff/elm-game-of-life)

# [Chefkoch-Shopping](https://chefkoch-shopping.herokuapp.com)
Experiment while checking out Node.js

- Integrates with the [Wunderlist](https://www.wunderlist.com) API
- Fetches Recipes from [Chefkoch](https://www.chefkoch.de)
- Parses ingredients (Chefkoch does not offer an open API, unfortunately)
- Allows selecting and editing ingredients to insert into Wunderlist

Commit message:

Add section about Standupbot to Projects

content/page/projects.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Projects
permalink: /projects/
aliases:
- /projects/
---

# [Standupbot](#)

Bot that allows you to have asynchronous standup meeting via Slack DM.
Standups are formatted and posted to a status channel for team members and managers to see.
Every user can configure his standup time independently.

- [Meetup presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1EwYcrZ7avlwdU9C6yntaoqN5ANCbapg_Gp7QJqb5ACo/edit?usp=sharing)
- Written in Elixir using OTP
- Deployed to multiple Slack workspaces and in active use every day

# [Multiplayer TicTacToe](https://tictactoe-elm.herokuapp.com/)

Written in Elm and using Phoenix Channels ❤️

- Written for a workshop at the [Elixir RheinMain Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/Elixir-Meetup-Rhein-Main)
- Got me started with Phoenix Channels and handling Websockets in Elm
- Source code available: [Elixir backend](https://github.com/jfornoff/tictactoe) & [Elm frontend](https://github.com/jfornoff/tictactoe-elm)

# [Game of Life](https://elm-game-of-life.herokuapp.com/)

Written in Elm ❤️

- Implements [Conway's Game of Life](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_Game_of_Life)
- Taught me quite a bit about encapsulation in Elm modules and how to represent the current Game state as Elm types
- Source code available on [Github](https://github.com/jfornoff/elm-game-of-life)

# [Chefkoch-Shopping](https://chefkoch-shopping.herokuapp.com)
Experiment while checking out Node.js

- Integrates with the [Wunderlist](https://www.wunderlist.com) API
- Fetches Recipes from [Chefkoch](https://www.chefkoch.de)
- Parses ingredients (Chefkoch does not offer an open API, unfortunately)
- Allows selecting and editing ingredients to insert into Wunderlist
